README_EN.md, before:

# g

<div style="text-align: center;"><img src="logo.jpg" width="400"  alt="logo"/></div>

> a powerful ls

[![CodeFactor](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/equationzhao/g/badge/master)](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/equationzhao/g/overview/master)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/Equationzhao/g)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/Equationzhao/g)
[![wakatime](https://wakatime.com/badge/github/Equationzhao/g.svg)](https://wakatime.com/badge/github/Equationzhao/g)
[![Go](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/actions/workflows/go.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/actions/workflows/go.yml)
![AUR license](https://img.shields.io/aur/license/g-ls)

![linux](https://img.shields.io/badge/Linux-FCC624?style=for-the-badge&logo=linux&logoColor=black)
![macos](https://img.shields.io/badge/mac%20os-000000?style=for-the-badge&logo=apple&logoColor=white)
![windows](https://img.shields.io/badge/Windows-0078D6?style=for-the-badge&logo=windows&logoColor=white)
![AUR version](https://img.shields.io/aur/version/g-ls?color=1793d1&label=g-ls&logo=arch-linux&style=for-the-badge)

g is a ls alternative with features:

1. display items with type-specific icons and colors that are easy to be customized
2. display in various layouts ( grid/across/byline/zero/comma/table/html/json/markdown/tree )
3. user-friendly options with many aliases
4. check file git-status when listing entries
5. highly customizable sort option
6. cross-platform ( Linux/Windows/MacOS )
7. option to fuzzy match the path like [`zoxide`](https://github.com/ajeetdsouza/zoxide) with [`fzf`](https://github.com/junegunn/fzf) algorithm

## Screenshots

![image](how-g-works.gif)

## Install

### From source

go version required >= 1.20

```bash
go install -ldflags="-s -w"  github.com/Equationzhao/g@latest
```

or Clone this repo (nightly build)

```bash
git clone github.com/Equationzhao/g
cd g
go build -ldflags="-s -w" # use -s -w to shrink size
# then add the executable file to your `PATH`
```

### Via package manager

![archlinux](https://img.shields.io/badge/Arch_Linux-1793D1?logo=arch-linux&logoColor=white)
user can install `g` from AUR

```bash
yay -S g-ls
```

homebrew:

```bash
brew tap equationzhao/core git@github.com:Equationzhao/homebrew-g.git
```

```bash
brew install g-ls
```

### Pre-built executable

#### deb
```bash
sudo dpkg -i g_$version_$arch.deb
```

#### tar,gz/zip
just download from [release page](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/releases), extract the gzip and add the executable file to your `PATH`

## Recommended terminal

macOS:
- [Iterm2](https://iterm2.com/)
- [Warp](https://www.warp.dev)

Windows:
- [Windows Terminal](https://github.com/microsoft/terminal)

cross-platform:
- [Hyper](https://hyper.is/)
- [WezTerm](https://wezfurlong.org/wezterm/index.html)

## Usage

```bash
g path(s)
```

with icon

```bash
g -icons
```

with mod(default) time

```bash
g -time    
```

with access/create/mod time

```bash
g -time -time-type=access
g -time -ac/cr/mod
```

with fileperm

```bash
g -permission 
g -octal-perm # show octal permission like 0777
```

with owner/group

```bash
g -owner 
g -group 
```

with size

```bash
g -size 
g -size -recusive-size # show size of dir recursively
```

show all files, including hidden files

```bash
g -sh 
g -show-hidden
g -a  
```

show dir only

```bash
g -dir 
```

list by line

```bash
g -1           
g -oneline     
g -single-column 
```

show file only with target ext

```bash
g -ext=<target ext(s)> 
# eg:
# g -ext=go,md
```

recurse into directories

```bash
g -R     
g -recurse 
```

limit depth in tree/recurse (default: no limit)

```bash
g -R -depth=<level> 
```

fuzzy search

```bash
g -f   
g -fuzzy 
# eg: g -f in
# /mnt/e/Project/gverything/index
# pathindex.go
```

disable index update

```bash
g -di            
g -no-update   
g -disable-index 
```

disable color

```bash
g -no-color  
g -colorless 
```

set color

```bash
g -color=always 
g -color=auto    # default
g -color=never   
g -color=16/basic       # 16-color
g -color=256/8bit       # 256-color
g -color=16m/24bit/true-color   # 24-bit
```

show checksum (md5,sha1,sha224,sha256,sha384,sha512,crc32)

```bash
g -cs -ca=sha256 
```

show git status

```bash
g -git     
g -git-status
```

output in table

```bash
g -tb
```

list in tree

```bash
g -tree
```

output in markdown, and render with [glow](github.com/charmbracelet/glow)
(colors are not supported in markdown )

```bash
g -md | glow 
```

![image](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/assets/75521101/7ec1e0d7-03cd-4968-ba48-2ec5375086fa)

...

## Shell scripts

generate shell scripts

```bash
g -init bash/zsh/fish/pwsh
```

### bash

```.bash
# add the following command to .bashrc
eval "$(g --init bash)"
# then `source ~/.bashrc`
```

### zsh

```zsh
# add the following command to .zshrc
eval "$(g --init zsh)"
# then `source ~/.zshrc`
```

### fish

```fish
#  add to fish config:
g --init fish | source
#  then `source ~/.config/fish/config.fish`
```

### powershell

```powershell
# add the following line to your profile
Invoke-Expression (& { (g --init powershell | Out-String) })
```

use command `echo $profile` to find your profile path

### nushell

```nu
# add the following to your $nu.env-path
^g --init nushell | save -f ~/.g.nu
# then add the following to your $nu.config-path
source ~/.g.nu

# if you want to replace nushell's g command with g
# add the following definition and alias to your $nu.config-path
#
# def nug [arg?] {
#     if ($arg == null) {
#         g $arg
#     } else {
#         g
#     }
# }
# alias g = ^g
```

## More options

[g.md](g.md) or check [g.equationzhao.space](g.equationzhao.space)

## Custom theme

[theme](THEME.md)

## TODO
- [x] Version sort
- [ ] Git sort
- [ ] Print security context
- [x] $OLDPWD
- [ ] Color Support for html/markdown

## Logo

created by bing

## Alternatives

this project is highly inspired by following projects that you wanna try!

- [exa](https://github.com/ogham/exa) or [eza](https://github.com/eza-community/eza)
- [lsd](https://github.com/lsd-rs/lsd)
- [ls-go](https://github.com/acarl005/ls-go)

## Star History

[![Star History Chart](https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=Equationzhao/g&type=Date)](https://star-history.com/#Equationzhao/g&Date)


## [![Repography logo](https://images.repography.com/logo.svg)](https://repography.com) / Recent activity [![Time period](https://images.repography.com/35290882/Equationzhao/g/recent-activity/d06TKxKV8-Bc1zgTdodyAUFkmX-KdMR5ydV1GeE2jJY/r-OWQ7WewQlCCz2r7byT3_mCR0x8LTCx95ZyLfOY7CI_badge.svg)](https://repography.com)

[![Timeline graph](https://images.repography.com/35290882/Equationzhao/g/recent-activity/d06TKxKV8-Bc1zgTdodyAUFkmX-KdMR5ydV1GeE2jJY/r-OWQ7WewQlCCz2r7byT3_mCR0x8LTCx95ZyLfOY7CI_timeline.svg)](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/commits)
[![Pull request status graph](https://images.repography.com/35290882/Equationzhao/g/recent-activity/d06TKxKV8-Bc1zgTdodyAUFkmX-KdMR5ydV1GeE2jJY/r-OWQ7WewQlCCz2r7byT3_mCR0x8LTCx95ZyLfOY7CI_prs.svg)](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/pulls)
[![Trending topics](https://images.repography.com/35290882/Equationzhao/g/recent-activity/d06TKxKV8-Bc1zgTdodyAUFkmX-KdMR5ydV1GeE2jJY/r-OWQ7WewQlCCz2r7byT3_mCR0x8LTCx95ZyLfOY7CI_words.svg)](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/commits)
[![Top contributors](https://images.repography.com/35290882/Equationzhao/g/recent-activity/d06TKxKV8-Bc1zgTdodyAUFkmX-KdMR5ydV1GeE2jJY/r-OWQ7WewQlCCz2r7byT3_mCR0x8LTCx95ZyLfOY7CI_users.svg)](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/graphs/contributors)

Commit message:

docs: :pencil: add todo
planned new features

README_EN.md, after:

# g

<div style="text-align: center;"><img src="logo.jpg" width="400"  alt="logo"/></div>

> a powerful ls

[![CodeFactor](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/equationzhao/g/badge/master)](https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/equationzhao/g/overview/master)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/Equationzhao/g)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/Equationzhao/g)
[![wakatime](https://wakatime.com/badge/github/Equationzhao/g.svg)](https://wakatime.com/badge/github/Equationzhao/g)
[![Go](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/actions/workflows/go.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/actions/workflows/go.yml)
![AUR license](https://img.shields.io/aur/license/g-ls)

![linux](https://img.shields.io/badge/Linux-FCC624?style=for-the-badge&logo=linux&logoColor=black)
![macos](https://img.shields.io/badge/mac%20os-000000?style=for-the-badge&logo=apple&logoColor=white)
![windows](https://img.shields.io/badge/Windows-0078D6?style=for-the-badge&logo=windows&logoColor=white)
![AUR version](https://img.shields.io/aur/version/g-ls?color=1793d1&label=g-ls&logo=arch-linux&style=for-the-badge)

g is a ls alternative with features:

1. display items with type-specific icons and colors that are easy to be customized
2. display in various layouts ( grid/across/byline/zero/comma/table/html/json/markdown/tree )
3. user-friendly options with many aliases
4. check file git-status when listing entries
5. highly customizable sort option
6. cross-platform ( Linux/Windows/MacOS )
7. option to fuzzy match the path like [`zoxide`](https://github.com/ajeetdsouza/zoxide) with [`fzf`](https://github.com/junegunn/fzf) algorithm

## Screenshots

![image](how-g-works.gif)

## Install

### From source

go version required >= 1.20

```bash
go install -ldflags="-s -w"  github.com/Equationzhao/g@latest
```

or Clone this repo (nightly build)

```bash
git clone github.com/Equationzhao/g
cd g
go build -ldflags="-s -w" # use -s -w to shrink size
# then add the executable file to your `PATH`
```

### Via package manager

![archlinux](https://img.shields.io/badge/Arch_Linux-1793D1?logo=arch-linux&logoColor=white)
user can install `g` from AUR

```bash
yay -S g-ls
```

homebrew:

```bash
brew tap equationzhao/core git@github.com:Equationzhao/homebrew-g.git
```

```bash
brew install g-ls
```

### Pre-built executable

#### deb
```bash
sudo dpkg -i g_$version_$arch.deb
```

#### tar,gz/zip
just download from [release page](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/releases), extract the gzip and add the executable file to your `PATH`

## Recommended terminal

macOS:
- [Iterm2](https://iterm2.com/)
- [Warp](https://www.warp.dev)

Windows:
- [Windows Terminal](https://github.com/microsoft/terminal)

cross-platform:
- [Hyper](https://hyper.is/)
- [WezTerm](https://wezfurlong.org/wezterm/index.html)

## Usage

```bash
g path(s)
```

with icon

```bash
g -icons
```

with mod(default) time

```bash
g -time    
```

with access/create/mod time

```bash
g -time -time-type=access
g -time -ac/cr/mod
```

with fileperm

```bash
g -permission 
g -octal-perm # show octal permission like 0777
```

with owner/group

```bash
g -owner 
g -group 
```

with size

```bash
g -size 
g -size -recusive-size # show size of dir recursively
```

show all files, including hidden files

```bash
g -sh 
g -show-hidden
g -a  
```

show dir only

```bash
g -dir 
```

list by line

```bash
g -1           
g -oneline     
g -single-column 
```

show file only with target ext

```bash
g -ext=<target ext(s)> 
# eg:
# g -ext=go,md
```

recurse into directories

```bash
g -R     
g -recurse 
```

limit depth in tree/recurse (default: no limit)

```bash
g -R -depth=<level> 
```

fuzzy search

```bash
g -f   
g -fuzzy 
# eg: g -f in
# /mnt/e/Project/gverything/index
# pathindex.go
```

disable index update

```bash
g -di            
g -no-update   
g -disable-index 
```

disable color

```bash
g -no-color  
g -colorless 
```

set color

```bash
g -color=always 
g -color=auto    # default
g -color=never   
g -color=16/basic       # 16-color
g -color=256/8bit       # 256-color
g -color=16m/24bit/true-color   # 24-bit
```

show checksum (md5,sha1,sha224,sha256,sha384,sha512,crc32)

```bash
g -cs -ca=sha256 
```

show git status

```bash
g -git     
g -git-status
```

output in table

```bash
g -tb
```

list in tree

```bash
g -tree
```

output in markdown, and render with [glow](github.com/charmbracelet/glow)
(colors are not supported in markdown )

```bash
g -md | glow 
```

![image](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/assets/75521101/7ec1e0d7-03cd-4968-ba48-2ec5375086fa)

...

## Shell scripts

generate shell scripts

```bash
g -init bash/zsh/fish/pwsh
```

### bash

```.bash
# add the following command to .bashrc
eval "$(g --init bash)"
# then `source ~/.bashrc`
```

### zsh

```zsh
# add the following command to .zshrc
eval "$(g --init zsh)"
# then `source ~/.zshrc`
```

### fish

```fish
#  add to fish config:
g --init fish | source
#  then `source ~/.config/fish/config.fish`
```

### powershell

```powershell
# add the following line to your profile
Invoke-Expression (& { (g --init powershell | Out-String) })
```

use command `echo $profile` to find your profile path

### nushell

```nu
# add the following to your $nu.env-path
^g --init nushell | save -f ~/.g.nu
# then add the following to your $nu.config-path
source ~/.g.nu

# if you want to replace nushell's g command with g
# add the following definition and alias to your $nu.config-path
#
# def nug [arg?] {
#     if ($arg == null) {
#         g $arg
#     } else {
#         g
#     }
# }
# alias g = ^g
```

## More options

[g.md](g.md) or check [g.equationzhao.space](g.equationzhao.space)

## Custom theme

[theme](THEME.md)

## TODO
- [x] Version sort
- [ ] Git sort
- [ ] Print security context
- [x] $OLDPWD
- [ ] Color Support for html/markdown

The following are new features of `eza`, we may support them in the future
- [ ] --git-repos: list each directory’s Git status, if tracked
- [ ] --git-repos-no-status: list whether a directory is a Git repository, but not its status (faster)


## Logo

created by bing

## Alternatives

this project is highly inspired by following projects that you wanna try!

- [exa](https://github.com/ogham/exa) or [eza](https://github.com/eza-community/eza)
- [lsd](https://github.com/lsd-rs/lsd)
- [ls-go](https://github.com/acarl005/ls-go)

## Star History

[![Star History Chart](https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=Equationzhao/g&type=Date)](https://star-history.com/#Equationzhao/g&Date)


## [![Repography logo](https://images.repography.com/logo.svg)](https://repography.com) / Recent activity [![Time period](https://images.repography.com/35290882/Equationzhao/g/recent-activity/d06TKxKV8-Bc1zgTdodyAUFkmX-KdMR5ydV1GeE2jJY/r-OWQ7WewQlCCz2r7byT3_mCR0x8LTCx95ZyLfOY7CI_badge.svg)](https://repography.com)

[![Timeline graph](https://images.repography.com/35290882/Equationzhao/g/recent-activity/d06TKxKV8-Bc1zgTdodyAUFkmX-KdMR5ydV1GeE2jJY/r-OWQ7WewQlCCz2r7byT3_mCR0x8LTCx95ZyLfOY7CI_timeline.svg)](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/commits)
[![Pull request status graph](https://images.repography.com/35290882/Equationzhao/g/recent-activity/d06TKxKV8-Bc1zgTdodyAUFkmX-KdMR5ydV1GeE2jJY/r-OWQ7WewQlCCz2r7byT3_mCR0x8LTCx95ZyLfOY7CI_prs.svg)](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/pulls)
[![Trending topics](https://images.repography.com/35290882/Equationzhao/g/recent-activity/d06TKxKV8-Bc1zgTdodyAUFkmX-KdMR5ydV1GeE2jJY/r-OWQ7WewQlCCz2r7byT3_mCR0x8LTCx95ZyLfOY7CI_words.svg)](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/commits)
[![Top contributors](https://images.repography.com/35290882/Equationzhao/g/recent-activity/d06TKxKV8-Bc1zgTdodyAUFkmX-KdMR5ydV1GeE2jJY/r-OWQ7WewQlCCz2r7byT3_mCR0x8LTCx95ZyLfOY7CI_users.svg)](https://github.com/Equationzhao/g/graphs/contributors)
